---
title: "Winter code freeze chronicles: A foray into Rust"
layout: blog
---



**Introduction**
<br/><br/>&nbsp;&emsp;Of the many things that become harder to find each passing winter--the snowfall, my hair, the grocery and rent budget—perhaps most noticeable is time to myself. Yet even as free moments become scarcer, I’m always surprised at how even a few empty hours make a significant impact. This winter holiday, I spent as much time as I could tolerate resting my eyes and my brain. I read a few novels and magazines, cooked new recipes, and went for some hikes. Having passed those 12 hours successfully, I leapt back into coding, refreshed for another year.
<br/><br/>&nbsp;&emsp;Working at a data analytics company has made me an adept Python programmer. Python is the *lingua franca* of work in our sphere since it can be handed between data engineers, data scientists, data analysts, and project managers successfully while accomplishing most of our objectives with minimal development overhead. Python’s classic compromises—speed, size, and typing—aren’t typically a large issue since most bottlenecks in data analytics are tied to the quantity of data being processed. Furthermore, Python-specific tools like Airflow and pandas have become staples of the field. Lately, however, I’ve found myself wishing for a more performant language as I pick up specialized work around the fringes of our organization and in my personal life. Extra points if I never have to set up a *venv* on multiple servers again.
<br/><br/>&nbsp;&emsp;Purveyors of infrequently trafficked and even more infrequently updated static HTML blogs like this one are likely familiar with the programming language Rust. It is an up-and-coming language with a devoted following for good reason. Many Unicode characters have been spilled evangelizing the language, so I will skip all but the most cursory summary here. It is a compiled language with a number of noteworthy features including enums, macros, and borrowing. At an even more basic level, it’s *fast* without many of the usual tradeoffs. Having seen the language place first in multiple Stack Overflow developer satisfaction surveys and having taken an interest in Polars—a DataFrame library written in Rust—I decided to explore it further with my free time last month.
<br/><br/>&nbsp;&emsp;The following is a summary of my thoughts on the language. Spoiler: I loved using it and plan to continue coding in Rust. A caveat for now is that I haven’t written any noteworthy projects in it—I’ve just rewritten basic features I often implement in my work and done a dozen or so LeetCode questions with it. This approach exposed me to a large portion of the basic language and syntax, but I hope to do more involved development work with the language soon.
<br/><br/>**The borrow checker**
<br/><br/>&nbsp;&emsp;I can’t remember how to do footnotes in Markdown, so I’m not citing this (Yes, I am available for hire to work on your LLMs), but borrowing is Rust’s most discussed feature. Despite the outsized discussion around borrowing, I found the borrow checker to be quite simple to manage—just add ampersands everywhere until your program compiles. Unfortunately, if that approach fails, you may have to read the documentation. Even prior to reading more extensively about the borrow checker, I found it largely intuitive.
<br/><br/>&nbsp;&emsp;Many newer users of interpreted languages are guilty of what I would call “word-banking.” Much like the word-banks on tests in 5th grade, these programmers declare all their variables at the top of their program. This approach is annoying for two reasons—first, you may have to traverse hundreds or thousands of lines using / or CTRL+F to understand values used later in the program. Second, and often most impactful, doing more intensive operations like parsing large files or making network requests at the beginning of your program without actually needing them at that moment can introduce unneeded complexity.
<br/><br/>&nbsp;&emsp;Breaking this habit requires thought about scope. This impulse is important for understanding Rust’s borrow checker. I know this is rudimentary, but my point is that understanding the borrow checker at a basic level can come from a rudimentary understanding of where you need your variables. I found myself encountering far fewer problems with the borrow checker than I expected, largely because I could say, “I need this here first, here next, and finally here,” and remember to use borrowing for that intermediary step. The LSP helped me wherever I forgot.
<br/><br/>&nbsp;&emsp;There are certain cases where I struggled with the borrow checker. Most notable was match guards, which is a syntactic construction that allows the use of an outer variable in a match statement. Initially, I couldn't understand how to use an outer variable within a match statement. Even when I discovered match guards, I found it difficult to understand the documentation I read on this topic. I intend to spend more time with this concept in order to better understand it.
<br/><br/>**Growing pains with methods and the syntax**
<br/><br/>&nbsp;&emsp;There were other situations where it was apparent that I need to study more. Finding the correct methods in Rust is more complicated than in Python, for instance, where you can say *for x in y* or *print(dir(x))* until something happens. As an example, iteration in Rust requires intentional thought in combination with the borrow checker, as you may have to use *iter()* or *iter_mut()* or *inter_iter()*. You can also introduce parallel iteration. This example is an overly simplistic one, but I hope that it’s evident that Rust is a language that is well-suited to thoughtful reading of its very helpful documentation, as opposed to fumbling around. The LSP also helps here.
<br/><br/>&nbsp;&emsp;Other features, such as the question mark syntax for handling possible error values like a pachinko machine or the use of the equals sign in ranges, were breaths of fresh air. Compare these features to Go, which apparently decided to offset having to type *if err != nil* dozens of times per project by making its loop syntax terse and awkward, and you’ll understand why programmers like writing Rust. I look forward to finding additional opportunities to familiarize myself with features that may have more complex uses, such as enums, macros, and the use of *Box* to allocate heap memory. I also appreciated doing type declarations in the variable, such as *10i32*.
<br/><br/>**Notes on learning and libraries**
<br/><br/>&nbsp;&emsp;Cargo is a very helpful tool and I found it to be very easy to import crates and join project files. Rust has a wealth of complete, well-maintained, and extensible libraries for a relatively nascent language and developer community. This component of the language is what compelled me to finally learn it—despite ostensibly being a systems programming language, its community is resolute in providing flexibility and resources for broad application. The crates I’ve used for ETL purposes do a great job of providing helpful tools while also avoiding opaque abstractions. A counterexample of this positive feature of Rust’s crates are some Python libraries, which often end up hosting a tangle of class-based workers with inconsistent methods (see *df = pd.read_csv()* vs *df = pd.DataFrame.from_dict)*. I’m excited about the future of Rust’s crates and tooling as more enthusiastic and motivated developers join its proponents.
<br/><br/>&nbsp;&emsp;The official Rust Documentation on *rust-lang.org* coupled with its helpful and intelligible compiler provide a great jumping-off point for fledgling Rust developers. Its foundational resources do a fantastic job at mitigating the barriers-to-entry that the language faces due to its unique features and many developers’ lack of familiarity with compiled or systems languages. I highly recommend it to both polyglot developers and developers looking for a main workhorse language.
<br/><br/>**Parting words**
<br/><br/>&nbsp;&emsp;If you’re looking for advice or collaboration, feel free to visit my “About” section. If you’re my CTO, please support Rust; I promise I won’t break anything. As a result of the language, at least. If we’re friends in real life and all these words mean nothing to you, thanks for reading anyway :-).
